Title: Quantum Hell
Date: 2015-12-10
Slug: quantum-immortality-to-quantum-hell
Category: Philosophy
Status: published
Image: images/sunset.jpg

It's fun to twist thought experiments around and see what kinds of strange
conclusions you can get out of them. Let's do that with quantum immortality. I'm
hopefully going to convince you to be *absolutely terrified* of the many-worlds
interpretation of quantum mechanics.

Surely you've heard of the quantum suicide thought experiment. It's the one
where you prove to yourself that the multiverse exists by stepping in front of
a loaded gun and having it fire through your gray matter if a quantum coin flip
comes up heads. The idea is, if you repeat that 100 times, you won't die because
as soon as you die, your experience stops, so the only *possible outcome, for
you*, is that the gun didn't fire. If you're worried about being alive between
when the bullet leaves the barrel and when it strikes your head, replace the gun
with a nuclear bomb or insta-kill radiation going at the speed of light. Sure,
in about 2<sup>100</sup> parallel universes, *everyone else* sees you die, but
in at least one, the coin will come up tails 100 times in a row, and that's what
you'll experience. It's an event so unlikely that you'll be forced to conclude
the multiverse exists. Don't try this at home.

If you think about the quantum suicide experiment a little bit more, you'll
realize that the quantum coin coming up tails isn't the only way to survive.
A flaming meteor could tunnel through your ceiling and destroy the death machine
moments before it kills you. Or, a little more likely, the gun would jam, or an
earthquake would tip it over, etc. Quantum weirdness can make these "classical"
life-saving events happen, too. In other words, the quantum coin wasn't really
an important part of the thought experiment. Even if the gun was set to always
fire, *something* would save you. If you're about to get hit by a truck, there's
*some* universe where a freak sinkhole opens up and swallows the truck before it
hits you. That's quantum immortality.

So, quantum immortality is the crazy idea that you can't ever die because some
crazy quantum fluke will always save you. Sounds like a pretty good deal, but is
it really something you'd want? Let's think about it.

Remember that objection to quantum suicide, "What about your experience after
the gun fires but before you die?" That turns out to be really important. After
the bullet clears the other side of your skull, you'll probably still be
experiencing *something*. I mean, it's going to take a while, at least a few
milliseconds, for all of your brain activity to stop. This is how we turn
quantum immortality into quantum hell: Why should quantum mechanics save you
*before* the gun fires, and not after blood starts draining out of a 9mm hole in
your skull?

To bring more intuition into this version of the thought experiment, let's
imagine you're dying a slow death. Every day, your condition gets worse, and
after years of deterioration, you finally get pronounced dead. In at least one
world, quantum immortality isn't going to let you *really* die. As you get
closer and closer to true death, rarer and rarer quantum flukes happening inside
your body keep you going. You simply approach death, never attaining it. It's
like there's a quantum healing force keeping you *just barely* alive.

If this isn't the most horrifying thought experiment ever conceived, please tell
me what is. If quantum mechanics is accurate, the many-worlds interpretation is
right, you being alive implies there's at least one future with non-zero
amplitude where you remain alive, and the quantum suicide argument is valid,
then this will happen to you!

It might not be as bad as it sounds. Things you'd rather not experience, like
bad thoughts and pain, probably need a lot of brain infrastructure to work.
Quantum healing probably won't sustain those structures for long. And so,
eventually, you'll be experiencing *almost* nothing, yet still *something*. You
will degrade to a point where maybe once every millennium you will feel a mild
blip of experience, and then you will be out again for another thousand years.

Thought experiments are fun; don't take them too seriously.
