Title: Seven
Date: 2021-06-04
Slug: seven
Category: Philosophy
Status: published
Image: images/seven2.jpg

You awaken, feeling rather groggy, to find yourself in a narrow hallway. It
seems to extend off to infinity, you can’t quite make out if it ends or not. On
the left-hand wall there is a sequence of evenly-spaced doors. Each door is
apparently numbered in order, starting from zero. As you walk down the hallway,
you notice that the numeric characters become smaller and smaller in order to
accommodate larger-and-larger numbers on the identically-sized placards.

Thinking nothing of the strange situation you are in, you decide to enter door
seven, the one that happens to be beside you at this particular moment. Inside,
it’s pitch black, but there’s a cord hanging from the ceiling illuminated by
light from the hallway. You pull the string, and a light directly inside the
room turns on. It’s followed by another a bit further down, then another, and
another in a sequence of lights illuminating down what you realize is yet
another hallway. The hallway continues so far into the distance that you can no
longer make out individual lights turning on, just a blur of ever-increasing
brightness.

To your left in this new room, you find a series of cabinets. On the cabinet
doors are inscribed markings, totally inscrutable to you. You’re intrigued,
since the markings seem to be packing more and more complexity into the same
amount of space as the hallway extends, reminiscent of the decreasing font size
of the numbers on the main hallway’s doors.

You take a number of steps forward and open what you later counted to be the
eighth cabinet from the door, which stood out to you because of its substantial
signs of wear. Its hinges are cracked and its handle almost worn off, looking as
though it had been opened far too many times before. The exact shape of the
symbol on its door isn’t quite possible to reproduce here, but it looked
something like,

<br/><br/>

<center>
<span style="font-size: 100pt;">♅</span>
</center>

<br/>

You open the cabinet’s creaky door to find some parchment, heavily worn, with an
even stranger symbol drawn on it,

![Strange Symbol]({filename}/images/seven/Seven-TMalpha.png)

Above this symbol is a number, “107”, written in the very same typeface as the
numbers on the main doors. You open an adjacent cabinet, the one to the right
labeled ♆, which is much less worn—only the eighth cabinet seems to be
worn—to find more parchment. This time, the parchment reads,

![Strange Symbol]({filename}/images/seven/Seven-TMbeta.png)

You can’t make sense of what the symbol means, but it has above it the same
number again, 107. You open a few more cabinets nearby, the ones labeled ♃, ♄,
and ♇, and confirm they too contain parchment beginning “107” followed by
similar-looking symbols of wildly-varying complexity.

Curiosity begins to overcome you. You start to think. “The number 107 must have
some kind of importance”, you reason, “for it to be written on all of these
sheets of parchment.” “In the main hallway, there must be a door with this exact
number written on it! That’s what this must mean!”

On your way out of the room, you pull on the light-cord again and a sequence of
blackness descends down the hallway. The far-off distance begins to dim as you
head towards door 107.

<center>
\*\*\*
</center>

Some moments later, you arrive at door 107. You swing the door open to reveal
another light-cord and, after waiting a brief moment for the illumination, you
see what at first appears to be a duplicate of the hallway in the last room. As
you begin to worry you were wrong about the meaning of “107” and that the long
walk here was pointless, you notice that the symbols on *these* cabinets’
doors are all of the *same* strange form that you found on the parchment in room
seven! The first cabinet to your left reads,


![Strange Symbol]({filename}/images/seven/Seven-TM0.png)

And the second,

![Strange Symbol]({filename}/images/seven/Seven-TM1.png)

And the fifth,

![Strange Symbol]({filename}/images/seven/Seven-TM2.png)

Once again, the cabinets’ symbols grow in apparent complexity the further down
the hallway you go, but shrinking so that they never take up more space. “I must
be able to find one of the symbols I saw in the previous room!” you think, but
you quickly realize that the symbols you saw before were far too complex. In
this ordering, they would be miles and miles into the room, if they could even
be found here at all.

You decide to walk down the room anyway to see if you can find an end. A
considerable distance down the hallway, you find yet another heavily-worn
cabinet standing out from the rest. By this point, you’ve lost count of exactly
how many cabinets you’ve passed, but it must have been a little over a hundred,
and the room still seems to have no end.

You open the disheveled cabinet, and inside you find not parchment this time but
a *vial*, a vial full of dimly-glowing fluid. Written on the vial is another
number, this time a much larger one,  18408600335515421047. “This is probably
another door-number,” you think, “but I could never make it there.” In an
adjacent cabinet, you find another vial of fluid, but the fluid is glowing so
brightly that it burns. You slam the cabinet door shut to protect your eyes, but
not before catching a glimpse of the same large number written on it, its
afterimage now fading from view.

Still in a state of curiosity, you leave the room and decide to enter a random
door nearby. Inside are the same cabinets again, but this time instead of
labels, small cages are affixed to the cabinets’ doors. Inside the cages are
bright-orange birds with curled beaks, fed by automatic feeding machines. The
birds are chirping, and the cacophony of the room is almost deafening. You make
out that the first bird is silent, the second chirps repeatedly, and the third
is making bursts of double-chirps, but stepping any further into the room is too
loud, so you leave.

Now beginning to worry that this is all too weird, you run down the hallway
towards where you began and open doors haphazardly in an effort to find out just
what is going on. Behind door 97, the cabinets are again labeled with what look
like polynomials, but their insides are black voids with blotches of light
that appear to be spiral galaxies in the far-off distance. In 67, the cabinets
are labeled by grids of putrid, decaying biological matter. “This is insane!”
you say out loud. “What is this place?” In 47, the labels are jars of pebbles.
You’re glad that it’s something sane this time, but inside the cabinets you find
unfamiliar machines whirring away!

Finally you come to 37 where you find cabinets labeled by ordinary numbers,
written in strange hard-to-read fonts. The reassurance of finding somewhat
regular numbers is quickly interrupted as you open the first cabinet to find a
miniature human, chained to a screw driven into the bottom, screaming
“seventeen! seventeen! seventeen!”.

Now horrified, you run out of the room and sprint towards door zero, hoping for
a way out of this awful place. In your state of panic, you realize that you have
no memory of how you got here nor do you have any recollection of events from
your past. “This must be a dream! This has to be a dream!” you scream out loud,
but you can’t find a way to wake yourself up. You fly past doors in reverse
order, passing 11, 10, 9, 8, … frantically searching for a way out. 

At the end of the hallway, just past door zero, you see an opening with no
label. “This must be the exit!” You rush toward it and fly through without
giving it any second thought. Suddenly you find yourself weightless and
drifting. The hallway is now behind you and quickly receding into the distance.
*It’s black*. There are no other buildings or structures, no world, not even a
surface. There is nothing but a dim glow from the now-faraway hall, and
precisely seven stars in the sky.
